---
title: 👹 Radiculopathy, cauda equina syndrome & neurogenic claudication
Date: 2024-08-03
Summary: ''

weight: 30
categories: 
- Neurosurgery
- Pain
Tags:
- claudication
- foot drop


draft: false
params:
  author: Afdhaal
---

## Radiculopathy, cauda equina syndrome & neurogenic claudication
## Introduction
- **Radiculopathy** is a symptom generated by pathology affecting the *nerve roots*.
- **Peripheral neuropathy** is differentiated from radiculopathy by the *distribution of the symptoms*.

## Anatomy
- The nerve roots ‘**radiate**’ from the spinal cord = radiculopathy.
- The root traverses four zones: 
1. the central canal (intrathecal);
2. the lateral recess (within the root sleeve);
3. the foramen; and
4. the extraforaminal space .

## Pathology
- Due to both compression and inflammation - ‘*chemical neuroradiculitis*’.
- nucleus pulposis herniation = **Slipped disc**
	- Due both compression and inﬂammation 
	- Causes 90% of radiculopathy. 
- Most intervertebral disc prolapses are *paracentral* - **zones 1 and 2**.
	- Irritation here can cause symptoms in the *transiting root* 

## Assessment
The goals:
- localize the **level** of the lesion
- identify the **nature** of the lesion
  - UMN vs LMN pathology
- screen for **emergency** conditions
  - Cauda equina syndrome
  - Acute painful foot drop
- screen for **anaesthetic** risk factors.
  - Fitness for surgery

### History 
- Pain - Electric shock like severe pain increase when limb extended.
- altered perianal sensation
- urogenital symptoms - ‘autonomic dysfunction’ 
	- insensate urinary incontinence
	- i.e. retention and has overﬂow incontinence. 

### Examination
- Root tension manoeuvres (Lasegue and Braggard’s) 
- Tone and reﬂexes should be normal or reduced. 
- If hyperreﬂexia and hypertonia -> assess cervicothoracic spine.
- Perianal sensory loss -> strong predictor of cauda equina compression 


|**Feature**|**Bragard Test**|**Lasegue Test**|
|---|---|---|
|**Purpose**|To evaluate nerve root compression and differentiate between a genuine and pseudo-Lasegue sign|To evaluate sciatic nerve irritation or lumbar nerve root irritation|
|**Patient Position**|Supine|Supine|
|**Initial Movement**|Examiner raises the patient's leg while extended at the knee until pain is felt (Lasegue sign)|Examiner raises the patient's leg while extended at the knee until pain is felt|
|**Subsequent Movement**|Examiner lowers the leg just until the pain subsides, then dorsiflexes the foot|None|
|**Positive Test Indication**|Pain reproduced upon dorsiflexion of the foot indicates nerve root compression|Pain in the back or along the sciatic nerve distribution indicates sciatic nerve irritation|
|**Area of Concern**|Nerve root compression, typically between L4 and S1 levels|Sciatic nerve or lumbar nerve roots|
|**Mechanism of Pain Elicitation**|Stretching of the sciatic nerve through dorsiflexion|Stretching of the sciatic nerve during leg raise|


## Red ﬂags of cauda equina syndrome
- Bilateral leg neurological deﬁcit
	- major motor weakness 
		- knee extension, 
		- ankle eversion,
		- or foot dorsiﬂexion 
- Recent-onset urinary retention +/- incontinence 
- Recent-onset faecal incontinence
- Perianal or perineal sensory loss
- lax anal sphincter

## Imaging
- MRI imaging T2 within 6 months of onset of symptoms
- CT myelogram -  If patient with a old implantable devices.

## Treatments

### Non-surgical
- The majority (90%) of radiculopathy are treated non-surgically. 
- 1st line - Antineuropathics 
	- Eg: duloxetine
	- ﬁrst-line treatment in radiculopathy without motor symptoms 
- 2nd line pregabalin and gabapentin. 
	- Mechanism of action: works at the root and spinal cord level to reduce ascending pain ﬁbre neuronal discharge.
#### Steroid injection
- Peri-root steroid injection is an effective treatment.
- reduces the production of inﬂammatory mediators.
- Efﬁcacy rates are high, with 66% of patients with good relief at a year.

### Surgery
- Microdiscectomy - remove the compressive disc extrusion
	- 80% - 90% have relief of pain in the immediate postoperative period
	- often motor and sensory symptoms respond less reliably and less immediately. 
- A small laminotomy allows for fenestration of the ligamentum ﬂavum.
- Medial facetectomy allows lateral recess and proximal foraminal decompression of the nerve root.

- Common complications:
	- infection 3%
	- recurrent disc prolapse 5%
	- inadvertent durotomy (‘CSF leak’) 7%
	- continuing radicular symptoms 10%.
- Rare complications:
	- 1% nerve injury resulting in urogenital, motor or sensory deﬁcits
	- 1:4000 of iliac vessel injury during discectomy
	- very rare risk of visual deﬁcit from prone positioning.

{{< hint "warning">}}
- The outcome is that 75% of patients at 3 months and 95% of patients at 1 year will have recovered with **conservative management.**
- the timing of the intervention is controversial, as many patients will improve without intervention. offer surgery or injection therapy after 3-6 months of failed conservative management.
{{< /hint >}}

## Specific conditions
### Cauda equina syndrome 
-  **Triad of symptoms** - Cauda equina syndrome (CESR) is deﬁned as a triad of symptoms including:
1. bilateral lower limb radicular pain
2. perianal sensory loss
3. insensate urinary retention and subsequent incontinence. 
- Often the ﬁrst symptom is the radiculopathy. Urogenital symptoms last.

- **Terms**
	- Cauda equina syndrome (CESR)
	- Cauda equina in *evolution* (CESE)  = A patient *progressing through* these symptoms. 
	- *Impending* cauda equina syndrome (CESI ) = A clinical picture with the *absence of the urinary dysfunction*. 
- **Investigation**: CESI, CESE and CESR represent a neurosurgical emergency and when seen mandate an urgent MRI scan 
- **Management**: 
	- surgical decompression within 24-48 hours. 
	- Delays leads to devastating urogenital dysfunction

### Acute foot drop 
- An acute painful foot drop suggests compression and may need surgical treatment. 
- Painless foot drop is likely a ‘medical’ aetiology such as diabetes.

- Ankle dorsiﬂexion 
	- Muscles
		- tibialis anterior, 
		- extensor hallucis longus and 
		- extensor digitorum longus. 
	- Nerve supply mostly L5, with a few from L4.
- L5 outﬂow is through **common peroneal nerve**.


- How to differentiate between a foot drop of L5 root aetiology and a foot drop from a common peroneal nerve aetiology?
	- The L5 root weakness associated with 
		- back pain, 
		- gluteal weakness, 
		- radicular pain and paraesthesia in a dermatomal distribution, 
		- relative preservation of peroneus muscle group (L4-S1) - i.e normal foot eversion.
	- The common peroneal nerve aetiology will have 
		- no gluteal weakness,
		- no back pain, 
		- pain and paraesthesia limited to the ﬁrst webspace
		- impaired foot eversion.

- Management 
	- early decompression
	- foot drop splints
- Good prognosis, with two-thirds improving by 6 months.


### Lumbar canal stenosis 
- *Neurogenic claudication*
- older patients
- **Clinical features**
	- Spine extension - Classical feature: walking and standing results in U/L or B/L leg pain/numbness/pins and needles
	- Spine ﬂexion: improves symptoms ‘**shopping trolley sign**’
	- often vague symptoms - legs feel dead
	- symptoms usually *slowly alleviated with rest*
	- signiﬁcant limitation to walking distance
- **Differential diagnosis**: vascular claudication. 
- **Pathology**
	- often insidiously progresses
	- The compression is mainly from hypertrophy and liagmentum ﬂavum degeneration facet joint to narrow the neural canal and lateral recess.
	- symptomatic when walking due to relative ischaemia of the roots.
- **Management**
	- antineuropathics are unhelpful. 
	- Due to the non-inﬂammatory nature, steroid injections also unhelpful. 
	- Posterior decompression can improve the claudicant symptoms greatly


