---
title: 👹 Radiculopathy
Date: 2024-08-03
Summary: ''

weight: 30
categories: 
- Neurosurgery
- Pain
Tags:
- claudication
- foot drop


draft: false
params:
  author: Afdhaal
---

# Radiculopathy
## Introduction
- **Radiculopathy** is a symptom generated by pathology affecting the *nerve roots*.
- **Peripheral neuropathy** is differentiated from radiculopathy by the *distribution of the symptoms*.

## Anatomy
- The nerve roots ‘**radiate**’ from the spinal cord = radiculopathy.
- The root traverses four zones: 
1. the central canal (intrathecal);
2. the lateral recess (within the root sleeve);
3. the foramen; and
4. the extraforaminal space .

## Pathology
- Due to both compression and inflammation - ‘*chemical neuroradiculitis*’.
- nucleus pulposis herniation = **Slipped disc**
	- Due both compression and inﬂammation 
	- Causes 90% of radiculopathy. 
- Most intervertebral disc prolapses are *paracentral* - **zones 1 and 2**.
	- Irritation here can cause symptoms in the *transiting root* 

## Assessment
The goals:
- localize the **level** of the lesion
- identify the **nature** of the lesion
  - UMN vs LMN pathology
- screen for **emergency** conditions
  - Cauda equina syndrome
  - Acute painful foot drop
- screen for **anaesthetic** risk factors.
  - Fitness for surgery

### History 
- Pain - Electric shock like severe pain increase when limb extended.
- altered perianal sensation
- urogenital symptoms - ‘autonomic dysfunction’ 
	- insensate urinary incontinence
	- i.e. retention and has overﬂow incontinence. 

### Examination
- Root tension manoeuvres (Lasegue and Braggard’s) 
- Tone and reﬂexes should be normal or reduced. 
- If hyperreﬂexia and hypertonia -> assess cervicothoracic spine.
- Perianal sensory loss -> strong predictor of cauda equina compression 


|**Feature**|**Bragard Test**|**Lasegue Test**|
|---|---|---|
|**Purpose**|To evaluate nerve root compression and differentiate between a genuine and pseudo-Lasegue sign|To evaluate sciatic nerve irritation or lumbar nerve root irritation|
|**Patient Position**|Supine|Supine|
|**Initial Movement**|Examiner raises the patient's leg while extended at the knee until pain is felt (Lasegue sign)|Examiner raises the patient's leg while extended at the knee until pain is felt|
|**Subsequent Movement**|Examiner lowers the leg just until the pain subsides, then dorsiflexes the foot|None|
|**Positive Test Indication**|Pain reproduced upon dorsiflexion of the foot indicates nerve root compression|Pain in the back or along the sciatic nerve distribution indicates sciatic nerve irritation|
|**Area of Concern**|Nerve root compression, typically between L4 and S1 levels|Sciatic nerve or lumbar nerve roots|
|**Mechanism of Pain Elicitation**|Stretching of the sciatic nerve through dorsiflexion|Stretching of the sciatic nerve during leg raise|

## Imaging
- MRI imaging T2 within 6 months of onset of symptoms
- CT myelogram -  If patient with a old implantable devices.

## Treatments

### Non-surgical
- The majority (90%) of radiculopathy are treated non-surgically. 
- 1st line - Antineuropathics 
	- Eg: duloxetine
	- ﬁrst-line treatment in radiculopathy without motor symptoms 
- 2nd line pregabalin and gabapentin. 
	- Mechanism of action: works at the root and spinal cord level to reduce ascending pain ﬁbre neuronal discharge.
#### Steroid injection
- Peri-root steroid injection is an effective treatment.
- reduces the production of inﬂammatory mediators.
- Efﬁcacy rates are high, with 66% of patients with good relief at a year.

### Surgery
- Microdiscectomy - remove the compressive disc extrusion
	- 80% - 90% have relief of pain in the immediate postoperative period
	- often motor and sensory symptoms respond less reliably and less immediately. 
- A small laminotomy allows for fenestration of the ligamentum ﬂavum.
- Medial facetectomy allows lateral recess and proximal foraminal decompression of the nerve root.

- Common complications:
	- infection 3%
	- recurrent disc prolapse 5%
	- inadvertent durotomy (‘CSF leak’) 7%
	- continuing radicular symptoms 10%.
- Rare complications:
	- 1% nerve injury resulting in urogenital, motor or sensory deﬁcits
	- 1:4000 of iliac vessel injury during discectomy
	- very rare risk of visual deﬁcit from prone positioning.

{{< hint "warning">}}
- The outcome is that 75% of patients at 3 months and 95% of patients at 1 year will have recovered with **conservative management.**
- the timing of the intervention is controversial, as many patients will improve without intervention. offer surgery or injection therapy after 3-6 months of failed conservative management.
{{< /hint >}}

